Start draft for RL 10 release notes (#2708)
rocky-linux/documentation: docs/release_notes/10_0.md

#### NetworkManager and Network Scripts

Deprecation of the old ifcfg-rh network scripts occurred in previous versions of Rocky Linux (9.x). With Rocky Linux 10, these scripts are now gone completely.

You have got to use NetworkManager now. Those tools include `nmcli`, `nmtui` and `nmstate`. This means some older files and commands will not work anymore, and where you keep your network config files has changed too.

* Files with the ifcfg- prefix in the /etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/ directory are not supported.
* The ifup and ifdown commands are no longer available.
* Legacy network scripts like ifup-local are no longer supported.
* Network configuration files are stored in the /etc/NetworkManager/system-connections/ folder.

#### DHCP Client and Server

The DHCP client in RL 10 is implemented as an internal subsystem of NetworkManager. The legacy dhcp-client package is no longer supported upstream and is removed.

The ISC DHCP server is end-of-life upstream and is replaced by its successor, Kea DHCP, in RL 10.

#### Network Bonding and Teaming

> The in previous versions deprecated NIC teaming feature is removed in Rocky Linux 10. As a replacement, configure a bond instead of a network team.

Reviewer: This sentence reads funny to me.  I'm not sure what the exact intended wording is.  Maybe just remove the first 'in' ?

Reviewer 2: Good point! I think it was missed in reading.

---
title: Current Release 10
tags:
  - 10
  - 10.0 release
  - Rocky Linux 10
---

## Rocky Linux 10

Rocky Linux 10 (RL 10) is the latest major release of Rocky Linux's enterprise operating system. 

### New Features and Changes

The following sections describe selected features of RL 10. 

As with all major Rocky Linux releases, there are way too many enhancements, changes, and new features to go over in this release note. 

The overview that follows highlights changes in the -  Architecture, Kernel, Installer, Networking, Security, Virtualization, Containers, Storage, Package management - categories. The features highlighted in this release note have been chosen based on their likely relevance to a general audience. 

For more information, refer to the official upstream [Release Notes for Red Hat Enterprise Linux 10.0](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_enterprise_linux/10/html/10.0_release_notes/index). 

> ### Supported Architectures

Reviewer 3: We could reuse the same way to display that as for 9 back in the days, that looked pretty good 🙂  

https://docs.rockylinux.org/release_notes/9_0/#major-changes

And yeah `IBM Power Systems, Little Endian (POWER9)` and `64-bit IBM Z (z14)` are supported 👍🏻

Reviewer 3: @sspencerwire did you miss the part about the how it's presented in 9?
Or intentional?

Rocky Linux 10 is supported on the following processor architectures:

* 64-bit AMD/Intel x86-64-v3 (x86_64)  
* 64-bit RISC-V (riscv64)  
* 64-bit ARMv8.0-A (aarch64)  
* ??? IBM POWER9, little endian (ppc64le) ???  
* ??? IBM z14 (s390x) ???

> 

Reviewer 3: Something something we do not support upgrades from 8 or 9 🙂

Reviewer 2: Ah yes. This note is in previous release note sets, but not here. I'll add that at the top.

* Files with the ifcfg- prefix in the /etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/ directory are not supported.  
* The ifup and ifdown commands are no longer available.  
* Legacy network scripts like ifup-local are no longer supported.  
* Network configuration files are stored in the /etc/NetworkManager/system-connections/ folder.

#### DHCP Client and Server

The DHCP client in RL 10 is implemented as an internal subsystem of NetworkManager. The legacy dhcp-client package is no longer supported upstream and is removed.

The ISC DHCP server is end-of-life upstream and is replaced by its successor, Kea DHCP, in RL 10.

#### Network Bonding and Teaming

The `teamd` service and the `libteam` library are removed in Rocky Linux 10. As a replacement, configure a bond instead of a network team. 

### Storage

In addition to the following changes, a number of storage-related device drivers have been added, updated, and removed from RL 10.

#### Global File System 2 (GFS2)

Support for the GFS2 file system is removed from RL 10.

#### Stratis

> Stratis is a new local storage manager. It provides managed file systems on top of storage pools, along with the following additional features:

Reviewer 2: Removing this section.

| Evolution personal information manager and email client | Thunderbird is available as a Flatpak from the Rocky Linux Ecosystem Catalog, or you can obtain a Flatpak or package from upstream or through Flathub. |
| Inkscape vector graphics editor | There is no vector graphics editor shipped in RL 10. |
| Totem (GNOME Videos) media player | There is no default desktop media player shipped in RL 10. The web browser can still play web-based media. |

TigerVNC is removed from RL 10. For VNC client functionality, use the Connections application. No VNC server is provided; gnome-remote-desktop, using RDP, replaces TigerVNC for desktop sharing, remote login, and headless sessions. 

The Motif X11 desktop environment and toolkit are also removed from RL 10.

### Infrastructure Services

Some of the services and packages that are replaced or removed in RL 10 include the following infrastructure services.

** Infrastructure Services changes**

| Removed | Replacement |
| :---- | :---- |
| power-profiles-daemon CPU throttle | tuned-ppd translation layer that supports applications written for the power-profiles-daemon |

> | redis in-memory key-value database | valkey in-memory key-value database |

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure if everyone followed that drama, might be good to mention that this is a redis fork

| sendmail mail transfer agent | Rocky Linux recommends migrating to the Postfix mail transfer agent. |
| spamassassin email spam filter | The spamassassin email spam filter is now found in the EPEL repository. |

### Dynamic Programming Languages

A number of popular programming languages have been updated to more recent versions.

**New versions of Selected programming Languages**

> | Languages and servers | Provided version |
> | :---- | :---- |
> | Dynamic programming languages | Python 3.12 Ruby 3.3 Node.js 22.13 Perl 5.40 PHP 8.3 | 
> 
> ### Web Servers and Database Servers
> 
> A number of popular server daemons have also been updated to more recent versions.
> 
> **New Versions of Selected Servers**
> 
> | Servers | Provided version |
> | :---- | :---- |
> | Web servers | Apache HTTP Server 2.4.63 nginx 1.26 |
> | Proxy caching servers | Varnish Cache 7.6 Squid 6.10 |
> | Database servers | MariaDB 10.11 MySQL 8.4 PostgreSQL 16.8 Valkey 8.0 |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Python 3.12
- Ruby 3.3
- Node.js 22.13
- Perl 5.40
- PHP 8.3

### Web Servers and Database Servers

A number of popular server daemons have also been updated to more recent versions.

**New Versions of Selected Servers**

Web servers

- Apache HTTP Server 2.4.63
- nginx 1.26

Proxy caching servers

- Varnish Cache 7.6
-Squid 6.10

Database servers

- MariaDB 10.11
- MySQL 8.4
- PostgreSQL 16.8
- Valkey 8.0
```

Maybe a better formatting 🙂

### RL Web Console

The RL web console is a web-based interface to manage and monitor your local system. A graphical file manager and text editor is now available in the web console if you install the cockpit-files RPM package.

The host switcher, which enabled multiple systems to be managed simultaneously, is deprecated and disabled by default due to security reasons.

The web console now supports configuring Stratis file-system size limits.

## Known Issues

### SELinux issue on virtual hosts

> When using a virtual host with a `passt` back end enabled and `memfd` type for memory, the interface will fail to start if SELinux is enabled. See [this upstream issue](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHEL-80407) for more information.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When using a virtual host with a `passt` backend enabled and `memfd` type for memory, the interface will fail to start if SELinux is enabled. See [this upstream issue](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHEL-80407) for more information.
```

#### Supported Microarchitecture Levels

On the x86_64 processor architecture, RL 10 no longer supports hardware at the x86-64-v2 microarchitecture level and earlier, and makes the x86-64-v3 microarchitecture level the distribution baseline. 

The x86-64-v3 microarchitecture is based on the feature set of the Intel Haswell processor generation. A handful of Intel Atom processors (such as the Gracemont-family processors) support  x86-64-v3 while some others such as Intel Atom Parker Ridge-family processors and the Intel Atom x6416RE Elkhart Lake-family processor do not provide x86-64-v3 features and are thus not supported in RL 10. If you have doubt about your processor's compatability, [use this procedure](https://docs.rockylinux.org/gemstones/test_cpu_compat/) to verify. 

AMD's implementation of the x86-64-v3 microarchitecture level, which serves as the baseline for Rocky Linux 10 on x86_64, was introduced with their Excavator microarchitecture. This means that processors older than those based on the Excavator architecture may not be fully supported by Rocky Linux 10. 

> Rocky Linux 10 has removed 32-bit compatibility for x86_64. Use 64-bit libraries or containers with 32-bit dependencies instead.

Reviewer 2: @lumarel this is all fine, I think though that we need to specifically mention the test procedure for the cpu compatibility in the warning admonition. In other words, where you have the following change: 

"See more information in the [Supported Microarchitecture Levels section](#supported-microarchitecture-levels)."

Do something like:

See more information in the [Supported Microarchitecture Levels section](#supported-microarchitecture-levels), and specifically the CPU test procedure indicated there for verification.

### Virtualization

Virtualization sees key changes: deprecation of the i440fx virtual machine type and the virt-v2v tool dropping support for legacy Rocky Linux versions.

### Containers

Podman 5 in RL 10 introduces several improvements, including the new default container runtime, `crun`, which replaces `runc`. Control Groups v2 is now the default cgroup version.

Key updates include the deprecation of the slirp4netns network mode, the ability to configure retry attempts and delays for image push and pull operations, and comprehensive support for multi-architecture container images.

Furthermore, Podman 5 continues to support Quadlets, a feature introduced in Podman 4.4, which enables managing Podman containers with systemd using declarative unit files.

### Software Management

RPM has been updated to version 4.19, including enhancements and updates to packaging and building tools. A new `rpmsort` command is introduced for correctly ordering RPM version strings in output pipelines.

rockstar@rockylinux:~$ **rpm -q kernel | sort**  
kernel-6.12.0-130.el10.x86_64  
kernel-6.12.0-13.el10.x86_64

rockstar@rockylinux:~$ **rpm -q kernel | rpmsort**  
kernel-6.12.0-13.el10.x86_64  

> kernel-6.12.0-130.el10.x86_64

Reviewer 2: Honestly, we don't need the prompt part at all. Let me see if I can fix that with code blocks and without the prompt line.

#### DNF

By default, DNF now omits downloading repository filelist metadata, enhancing responsiveness and conserving disk space. DNF commands that need this metadata will generally download it automatically.

#### Package Repositories

Packages in RL 10 are provided through two main repositories:

* BaseOS: Core functionality of RL  
* AppStream: Additional user-space applications, runtime languages, and databases

AppStream packages provide multiple versions or rolling versions of user-space components that are updated more often than the core operating system packages. Each Application Stream component is supported for a given lifecycle, either the same as RL 10 or shorter.

#### **Notes:**

DNF modularity is deprecated, and Rocky Linux does not intend to provide AppStream content as modules in RL 10, although in the future it might be provided as RPM packages, software collections, or Flatpaks.

> ### Desktop Environment
> 
> In RL 10, Wayland replaces the X.Org Server and xorg-x11-server package. Xwayland will support most X11 clients not yet ported to Wayland. Some desktop applications and components are also replaced in RL 10.
> 
> **Desktop Components changes**
> 
> | Removed | Replacement |
> | :---- | :---- |
> | gedit text editor | GNOME Text Editor (gnome-text-editor) |
> | Tweaks application | Use Tweaks options in GNOME settings |
> | Festival speech synthesizer | Espeak NG |
> | Eye of GNOME (eog) image viewer | GNOME Image Viewer (loupe) |
> | Cheese camera application | Snapshot application |
> | GNOME Terminal | ptyxis terminal |
> | PulseAudio daemon (but not the client interfaces) | Pipewire (which also supports an implementation of the PulseAudio client APIs); Pipewire is the default in RL 9 |
> 
> A number of graphical desktop applications are no longer provided by Rocky Linux as part of the RL 10 distribution. In most cases, these applications can be obtained from upstream sources or they might be available as Flatpaks.
> 
> **Applications Removed from RL 10**
> 
> | Removed | Substitution |
> | :---- | :---- |
> | LibreOffice office productivity software suite | The Document Foundation provides an official Flatpak at Flathub, or you can download upstream packages from [https://www.libreoffice.org/](https://www.libreoffice.org/). |
> | Evolution personal information manager and email client | Thunderbird either as a straight RPM or as a Flatpak from the Rocky Linux Ecosystem Catalog. You can also obtain a Flatpak or package from upstream or through Flathub. |
> | Inkscape vector graphics editor | There is no vector graphics editor shipped in RL 10, but you can find a Flatpak on Flathub. |
> | Totem (GNOME Videos) media player | There is no default desktop media player shipped in RL 10. The web browser can still play web-based media. |
> 
> TigerVNC is removed from RL 10. For VNC client functionality, use the Connections application. No VNC server is provided  
> gnome-remote-desktop, using RDP, replaces TigerVNC for desktop sharing, remote login, and headless sessions. 
> 
> The Motif X11 desktop environment and toolkit are also removed from RL 10.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Desktop Environment

In RL 10, Wayland replaces the X.Org Server. Xwayland will support most X11 clients not yet ported to Wayland. Some desktop applications and components are also replaced in RL 10.

#### Desktop Component changes

| Removed | Replacement |
| :---- | :---- |
| gedit text editor | GNOME Text Editor (gnome-text-editor) |
| Tweaks application | Use Tweaks options in GNOME settings or/and use the Flatpak on Flathub |
| Festival speech synthesizer | Espeak NG |
| Eye of GNOME (eog) image viewer | GNOME Image Viewer (loupe) |
| Cheese camera application | Snapshot application |
| GNOME Terminal | ptyxis terminal |
| PulseAudio daemon (but not the client interfaces) | Pipewire (has already been the default in RL 9) |

A number of graphical desktop applications are no longer provided by Rocky Linux as part of the RL 10 distribution. In most cases, these applications can be obtained from upstream sources or they might be available as Flatpaks on Flathub.

#### Removed Applications

| Removed | Substitution |
| :---- | :---- |
| LibreOffice office productivity software suite | Officially provided as Flatpak on Flathub, or you can download upstream packages from [https://www.libreoffice.org/](https://www.libreoffice.org/). |
| Evolution personal information manager and email client | Thunderbird is provided via the Appstream repository. You can also obtain a Flatpak or package from upstream or through Flathub. |
| Inkscape vector graphics editor | There is no vector graphics editor shipped in RL 10, but you can find a Flatpak on Flathub. |
| Totem (GNOME Videos) media player | There is no default desktop media player shipped in RL 10. The web browser can still play web-based media. Or choose a different media player from 3rd party repositories or as Flatpak from Flathub. |

TigerVNC is removed from RL 10. For VNC client functionality, use the Connections application. No VNC server is provided  
gnome-remote-desktop, using RDP, replaces TigerVNC for desktop sharing, remote login, and headless sessions. This is built into GNOME and can be configured in the Settings application. 

The Motif X11 desktop environment and toolkit are also removed from RL 10.
```

Keeping the format of the previous sections 👍🏻 
And I think some wording needed some improvement.

### Infrastructure Services

Some of the services and packages that are replaced or removed in RL 10 include the following infrastructure services.

> 
> ** Infrastructure Services changes**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Don't think this is necessary 🙂

| Removed | Replacement |
| :---- | :---- |
| power-profiles-daemon CPU throttle | tuned-ppd translation layer that supports applications written for the power-profiles-daemon |
| redis in-memory key-value database | valkey (a fork of redis) in-memory key-value database ^1 |
| sendmail mail transfer agent | Rocky Linux recommends migrating to the Postfix mail transfer agent. |
| spamassassin email spam filter | The spamassassin email spam filter is now found in the EPEL repository. |

1 In addition to `valkey`, the `valkey-compat-redis` package is in the Plus repository.

> ### Dynamic Programming Languages
> 
> A number of popular programming languages have been updated to more recent versions.
> 
> **New versions of Selected programming Languages**
> 
> - Python 3.12
> - Ruby 3.3
> - Node.js 22.13
> - Perl 5.40
> - PHP 8.3
> 
> ### Web Servers and Database Servers
> 
> A number of popular server daemons have also been updated to more recent versions.
> 
> **New Versions of Selected Servers**
> 
> Web servers
> 
> - Apache HTTP Server 2.4.63
> - nginx 1.26
> 
> Proxy caching servers
> 
> - Varnish Cache 7.6
> - Squid 6.10
> 
> Database servers
> 
> - MariaDB 10.11
> - MySQL 8.4
> - PostgreSQL 16.8
> - Valkey 8.0

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Dynamic Programming Languages

A number of popular programming languages have been updated to more recent versions.

- Python 3.12
- Ruby 3.3
- Node.js 22.13
- Perl 5.40
- PHP 8.3

### Web Servers and Database Servers

A number of popular server daemons have also been updated to more recent versions.

#### Web servers

- Apache HTTP Server 2.4.63
- nginx 1.26

#### Proxy caching servers

- Varnish Cache 7.6
- Squid 6.10

#### Database servers

- MariaDB 10.11
- MySQL 8.4
- PostgreSQL 16.8
- Valkey 8.0
```

Redundancy and formatting 🙂

> ### RL Web Console
> 
> The RL web console is a web-based interface to manage and monitor your local system. A graphical file manager and text editor is now available in the web console if you install the cockpit-files RPM package.
> 
> The host switcher, which enabled multiple systems to be managed simultaneously, is deprecated and disabled by default due to security reasons.
> 
> The web console now supports configuring Stratis file-system size limits.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### RL Web Console (Cockpit)

Cockpit is a web-based interface to manage and monitor your local system. A graphical file manager and text editor is now available in the web console if you install the `cockpit-files` RPM package.

The host switcher, which enabled multiple systems to be managed simultaneously, is deprecated and disabled by default due to security reasons.

Cockpit now supports configuring Stratis file-system size limits.
```

Lets stick to upstream 🙂

## Known Issues

### SELinux issue on virtual hosts

When using a virtual host with a `passt` backend enabled and `memfd` type for memory, the interface will fail to start if SELinux is enabled. See [this upstream issue](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/RHEL-80407) for more information.

> Participating and reporting bugs[¶](https://docs.rockylinux.org/release_notes/10_0/#reporting-bugs)
> 
> Please use the [Rocky Linux Bug Tracker](https://bugs.rockylinux.org/) to report any bugs you encounter. 
> 
> Connect with the Rocky Linux community! Jump into our [Forums](https://forums.rockylinux.org/),  [Mattermost](https://chat.rockylinux.org/),  IRC on Libera.Chat, [Reddit](https://reddit.com/r/rockylinux),  [Mailing Lists](https://lists.resf.org/), or whichever way you prefer to get involved.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Participating and reporting bugs

Please report any bugs you encounter to the [Rocky Linux Bug Tracker](https://bugs.rockylinux.org/). We also welcome you to join our community in any way you wish be it on our [Forums](https://forums.rockylinux.org), [Mattermost](https://chat.rockylinux.org), [IRC on Libera.Chat](irc://irc.liberachat/rockylinux), [Reddit](https://reddit.com/r/rockylinux), [Mailing Lists](https://lists.resf.org), or any other way you wish to participate!
```

And finally, never change a running system! 😀
